\section{Insight into Buck's Theorem}

\citet*{matousek:2002} gives two proofs for a simpler version of
\ref{theorem:xy:counting}. The second one is really nice and visual and we will
sketch it right now to give an insight on why \ref{theorem:xy:counting} holds
true.

The simpler theorem is the following,

\begin{theorem}
Consider the partition of space defined by an arrangement of \(m\) hyperplanes
in \(\R^d\). The number of cells (or \(d\)-cells, regions of dimension \(d\))
is at most
\begin{displaymath}
\Phi_d^n = \binom{m}{0} + \binom{m}{1} + \cdots + \binom{m}{d}
\end{displaymath}
\end{theorem}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{fig/x+y/buck/arrangement}
\caption{Induction steps in the second proof of \citet*{matousek:2002}}
\label{fig:xy:buck:arrangement}
\end{figure}

\begin{proof}
We assume a partition of space \(\R^d\) by a simple arrangement of \(n\)
hyperplanes, \ie all \(d\) hyperplanes intersect in exactly one point and no
more than \(d\) hyperplanes are incident to a point.

\ref{fig:xy:buck:arrangement} shows that we can divide the set of cells in two
disjoint subsets, \(\L\) and \(\U\). \(\L\) is constituted of cells that are
intersected by an imaginary additional hyperplane \(H_{\theta}\) having all
\(\binom{n}{d}\) intersections of the arrangement on one of its sides (either
\(H_{\theta}^{+}\) or \(H_{\theta}^{-}\)) and thus intersecting all the \(n\)
hyperplanes of the arrangement on one side of the vertices. \(\U\) contains the
remaining cells.
\begin{displaymath}
\card{\L} = \Phi_{d-1}^n \text{ since this is exactly the configuration for } \R^{d-1}
\end{displaymath}
\begin{displaymath}
\card{\U} = \binom{n}{d} \text{ since \dots}
\end{displaymath}
Imagine we drew a ball in each cell of the arrangement. If we pretend
\(H_{\theta}\) is the ground and we activate gravity, the balls in the cells of
\(\L\) would have fallen on \(H_{\theta}\). Each of them would be lying on a
\((d-1)\)-cell of the partition of \(H_{\theta}\) by the arrangement of the
intersections of each hyperplane of the arrangement with \(H_{\theta}\). The
balls in the cells of \(\U\) cannot fall on the ground since \(H_{\theta}\)
does not intersect the cells containing them. Balls in \(\U\) cells can thus
only end up in one of the \(\binom{n}{d}\) intersections of the \(n\)
hyperplanes.
\end{proof}

\citet*{matousek:2002} also shows that
\begin{displaymath}
\Phi_d^n = \Phi_d^{n-1} + \Phi_{d-1}^{n-1}
\end{displaymath}
in the first, more rigorous, proof. \(\Phi_d^{n-1}\) can be understood as the
number of cells of an arrangment of \(n-1\) hyperplanes that were existing
before the addition of an \(\nth{n}\) hyperplane. Then, \(\Phi_{d-1}^{n-1}\)
counts the number of cells that are cut in \(2\) by the \(\nth{n}\) hyperplane.
